and are transferred out to the Mount.
And it's rather hard to see a floating like this in Odyssey,
while it's playing the scene from 2001.
April 13, 1970.
The mood could only be described as relaxed.
Apollo 13, man's fifth lunar mission.
The third scheduled to land on the moon,
continued its tranquil coast.
This is the crew of Apollo 13, which is over there.
I see you meet after Apollo's decors
out our backs of the previous basketball
pack for a plus three V-Ev at Odyssey.
Bye.
13, we've got one more item for you when you get a chance.
We'd like you to stir up your cryo tanks.
In addition, I have a shaft in front of you.
It's OK.
Or look at the comment benefit if you need it.
OK.
Stand by.
OK, here we have a problem here.
This is Houston's second, please.
Oh, you're coming out of Apollo.
You better be both wonderful.
You might remain being wonderful.
OK, stand by it there, Jane. We're looking at it.
And we had a pretty large bank associated
with the question that warned him.
And the better it could be with the one that had an
emphatic on it once before.
And in our rear, we're starting to go ahead
and start dump the tunnel again.
April 11, 1970, launch day,
the crew of Apollo 13,
Jim Lovell, commander and veteran of three
previous missions.
He had orbited the moon Christmas 1968
on Apollo 8.
Fred Hayes is first time up, lunar module pilot.
Jack Swaggart, command module pilot.
Three days ago, he was on the backup crew.
Now he replaced Ken Mattingley.
Mattingley had been dropped from the mission
because he had been exposed to German measles.
He would watch the launch from Houston's mission control.
Auto sequence initiative, right?
Roger.
Flight booster.
No, yes, 4V-prepressed complete.
Roger.
Flight booster.
Yes, 1C-prepressed complete.
We're on internal power and we're going.
Roger, has a lucky com.
Got your space ahead.
Looks good.
Okay.
MCC, recorded to flight speed.
Ignition flight.
Roger.
On, start, right.
That's it, though.
I'll end it.
Roger.
Okay, battle has to look.
Looks good here.
Flight good agreement.
Okay, boost that, either.
That's what he looks good for.
Okay, camp, we're going on the ground.
Okay, we're going on, camp, huh?
Get really good flight.
Roger.
Those stuff, how do you look?
Looks good, flight.
We'll go.
Okay, battle.
We're going, flight.
Looks good here.
Got 1000 good flight.
Okay, econ, CNC.
Looks good, flight.
Okay, search.
Looks fine.
Through MAC, skewn with the overflight.
Roger, boost.
Go for stage, camp, huh?
And climb in, board out, flying, Roger.
Staging flight.
Roger.
Flight five, I could check your confirmed staging.
Flight booster, then, board out, was way early.
Okay.
I flight confirmed, number five, engine down.
Roger.
Do you see any problem with that, though, do you?
No, negative, not right now, flight.
Probably other engines are going.
The next step in the routine of lunar flight
was to burn out of Earth orbit toward the moon.
Then, full free of the third stage
and dock with the lunar module Aquarius.
At the controls of the command module Odyssey,
Jack's Wigard.
Where are the doctors?
Right here, understand how the doctors deal.
They pull Aquarius away from the Saturn third stage, the S4B.
Okay, I can see the S4B now at the hatch with that.
Odyssey and Aquarius moved away from Earth toward the moon.
Okay, here we have a problem here.
Five guns.
Go, guns.
We've had a hardware race time.
I don't know what it was.
Okay.
Are you two we've had a problem?
We've had a baby, both vulnerable.
You see an AC bus undervolt, per guns?
E-com.
Negative flight.
I leave the crew reported it.
We've got a main B undervolt.
We may have had an instrumentation problem flight.
Alright.
And we had a pretty large bank associated with the cargo and warranty map.
The sensation I had that I had sold a vibration accompanying the bank,
not a large vibration or shutter.
Is there any kind of leads we can give them
or are we looking at instrumentation?
We've got a real problem or what?
We're reading zero-end two pressure and fuel cell one and 13 psi on fuel cell 302 pressure.
Okay, what do you want to do?
Open circuit fuel cell on a drink.
That's from Flint.
Shut down the reactant valve and I asked for reconformation since when you do that,
it's sort of irreversible.
You shut one of these things down.
Only can be restarted from ground support equipment.
Yeah, that's physically seeing.
And I was thinking, you're looking out the...
...acto, we are a venting something.
We are a venting something out into the...
...appel base.
Okay, that's everybody.
Think of the kind of things we'd be venting.
Do you see you get anything that looks abnormal in your system?
Negative flight.
How about you?
You see anything that...
...with the instrumentation you got that could be venting?
That's a front flight.
And then you look at the system flight.
The van is concerned.
Okay, let's start scanning.
Here is a bulletin from ABC News.
The Apollo 13 spacecraft has had a serious power supply malfunction
that could cause the lunar landing mission to be terminated early.
I assume you've called in your backup.
It becomes flight signal.
If you call in your backup.
It becomes now.
I'll see if we can get some more brain power in the space.
We got one here.
Roger.
At the moment, the astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their trouble.
The late reports as the spacecraft now is operating on battery power alone.
All unnecessary equipment is being turned off.
Okay, now that's everybody keep cool.
We got a limestone attached.
The limspace craft's good.
So if we need to get back home, we got a lim to do a good portion of it with.
Okay, let's make sure that we don't do anything that's going to blow our CSM electrical power
with the batteries or that will cause us to lose the main of the fuel cell number two.
Okay, we want to keep the O2 and that kind of stuff working.
We'd like to have our CS, but we got the command module system.
So we're in good shape if we need to get home.
Let's solve the problem, but let's not make it any worse by guessing.
My concern was increasing all the time.
It went from, I wonder what this is going to do to the landing.
Do I wonder if we can get back home again?
Okay, come on, I'm coming back to you.
Flight, go ahead.
I think the best thing we can do right now is start a power down.
Right about then it was quite apparent to me that we're just a question of time that the command module was going to be dead.
You don't want to get fuel cell pumped off, do you?
We can do that on fuel cell number one flight.
Okay, well let's make sure we don't blow the whole mission.
I think a concern to me is starting, it's slow in equipment.
We had a problem.
We don't know the cause of the problem.
Flight, I've got a feeling we've lost two fuel cells.
I hate to put it that way, but I don't know why we've lost them.
It doesn't all tag up.
Network from flight.
Flight network.
Bring me up another computer in the RTCC.
We got one machine on the RTCC and we got dual CP, downstate.
Okay, I want another machine up in the RTCC and I want a bunch of guys keep running delogues down there.
Roger that.
What all this means is only speculation at this point.
First, though there has been some tumbling or rotation of the spacecraft,
the astronauts do not appear to be in any immediate danger.
I'll tell you what, GNC, can you get somebody in the back room to try to figure out what the equivalent delta V is we're getting?
So that we can see if we can backtrack to see if we can figure out what's vending.
Drugs we're going to try, it's light.
Okay.
When I looked up and saw both, the oxygen pressure is one actually, zero and another one going down.
It dawned on me and I'm sure Jack had read about the same time that we were indeed in serious trouble.
The only way to survive the situation was to transfer to the LEM.
Flighty Com.
Go, go, go.
The pressure in O2 tank 1 is all the way down to 297.
We've ever think about getting in the LEM or using the LEM systems.
I'd say this is a serious situation that we have ever had in the man's face point.
We've always called the LEM a good light boat under those circumstances.
If at any time in the mission however the LEM had separated and we would have gotten ourselves into a rendezvous situation
or the command module being around the moon, then what you state is absolutely true.
It would be a fatal situation.
Telling me you're from flight.
Go ahead, light. I want you to get some guys putting out minimum power in the LEM to sustain life.
The accident had occurred 200,000 miles from Earth.
Lovelled, swigored and haze rode in the lunar module attached to a lifeless command module.
Apollo 13 had started as a mission of scientific exploration.
It was now a matter of survival.
Since the command module was dead except for the oxygen and power hoarded for reentry,
the guidance platform of Aquarius designed to land on and take off from the moon would have to be used.
The first milestone, and I consider this after the accident, I guess, more or less the survival now,
the first milestone was to get alignment on the LEM platform.
Alignments are important because without knowing exactly which way the attitude of the spacecraft is and space is,
there's no way to tell how to burn or how to use the engines of that spacecraft to get the proper trajectory to come home.
The position we are now in the Earth and plane, we have to go around the moon to get back if we're going to use the dip-sangian.
You would have had enough capability with the SDS engine, but of course we don't very use that now.
So we have to go through the back side of the moon and come back.
To get into the correct orbit around the moon, the crew had burned out of a trajectory that would automatically bring them back to Earth.
They would have to get back onto a safe course toward Earth.
He needs to put his throttle to man also, right?
Throughout all ten minutes, he's at 29 percent now, everything.
This maneuver again was completed on time and because it was a manual burn, we had a three-man operation.
Jack would take care of the time. He'd tell us when the light off the engine went to stop it.
Said, handled pitch maneuver. I handled the roll maneuver and I pushed the button to start and stop the engines.
The quarrier should go for the burn.
40 percent.
Okay, the quarrier should look good.
Oh, shut down.
The first problem was solved. They were back on the path to Earth.
But there were many other problems to be solved.
From a building at Houston's Man Spacecraft Center, systems experts coordinated the coast-to-coast effort to get the crew back.
One of the big problems was consumables. There would be enough to eat and drink.
But in space, there are other factors. Oxygen to breathe, electrical power to keep the spacecraft alive, water to cool the equipment and keep it operating.
What we'll be doing until we get them back on the water is concentrating on everything that their lives are dependent upon at the moment rather than worrying about the accident.
Because there's nothing we can do about that now. It appears at the present time that everything is under control and that we have a safe situation at the moment.
Hey, I want to say you guys are doing real good work. So are you guys, Jack?
We are about 70 hours from home. And we think we have the situation in control. We projected the consumables as I've described.
And we have a plan for carrying out the rest of the mission. But there is going to be no relaxation at all as far as that goes from down to splat.
There was a key decision to be made before a power 13 went behind the moon. Where to bring them down.
Their present course would take them to the Indian Ocean where recovery would be difficult. A burn to bring them home quicker would take them to the Pacific Ocean near the recovery forces.
Bringing them home even fast to would place them in the South Atlantic again away from recovery forces. It was decided to take them to the Pacific.
We run these simulators both here and at the Cape and at the contractors that continuously ever since last night.
We've tried to simulate virtually everything that we've had the crew to do that is non-normal that they've done.
And we've proven most of the thing that we've been able to run on the simulator prior to passing it up to them. There may be some details.
But at least we've checked the feasibility of everything we've done and we'll continue to do that.
They passed 137 miles from the moon. For level it was the second time that he had seen the moon so near.
But there was no time for contemplation. There was another critical burn coming.
Okay, look at the cameras for the way. Let's get off at the first.
Let's go. Yeah, one can't.
And in Houston, the newsman poured in to tell an anxious world the story.
The world is destroying the water.
Shortly after Apollo 13 had separated from the Saturn III stage, the stage had been sent on to a trajectory toward the moon.
Its impact would be recorded by the seismometer left by Apollo 12.
By the way, according to the results now from Apollo 12's seismometer, looks like you're booster just hit the moon and it's rocking it a little bit.
Well, these propellers worked up this flight. After glad we didn't have a limb impact.
Jimmy, you are a go for the burn. Go for the burn.
Roger, on the, go for the burn.
Got him. It's okay.
We're good flight. Control. Okay.
We're okay. Five. Tell me where go. Five.
Ain't go okay.
We're good flight. Ground confirms ignition.
Well, buddy, 40%.
Well, it's Houston. You're looking good.
Roger.
Shut down. Roger, shut down.
I say that was a good burn.
Five. Cause now we want to power it on as it is possible.
To understand.
To conserve the electric power and cooling water, the crew shut down all but the vital life-sustaining systems of the limb.
I think the limb spacecraft's in excellent shape.
And I think it's fully capable of getting the crew back.
I think as we have found before every time we put the limb spacecraft to a test, it's always done much more than it was guaranteed to do.
And I think this is a good case in point.
Concern of the consumables. Cooling water. Electric power.
The limb water gun was leaking and we shut that off.
I guess it leaked about a quart of water I would estimate.
But it took me about two days to get my feet dry.
Of course, I think you were all aware that the temperatures were going down in both vehicles and it's made for very chilly feet for a couple days.
I think it's a good thing to have a good time.
Lord, your astronauts will come back safe.
If I may be serious for one moment and ask the entire audience for a moment of prayer for the crewmen of the Apollo 13,
I will hold silence for a moment.
ICS-A stands at 62% and B at 62%.
I see we've gone all along, dialed on his face.
The first thing about getting peeled back is because I didn't get any sleep when I was at home.
Command Mods were just slowly kept going down in temperature until I think just prior to reentry.
It was down to about 38 degrees.
Along with that, it was a sort of chilling coldness.
The walls were perspiring, the windows were completely wet.
It wasn't too healthy, I recall.
We went in there to get some hot dogs one day and it was like reaching in with a freezer or the food.
If you want my opinion on how they handled the situation, when it happened to handle the exact life we'd expect them to be.
Everybody was well on top of it as anybody could be who knew what we knew which isn't very much.
I'll have to admit.
But I think they did everything right within knowledge that was available to us and the timely fashion, which is what we expect them to do.
They did a beautiful job of it.
We actually had a third little sleep-free strength which Fred does then put on and buttoned up and kept a little bit warm.
The astronauts faced another problem. Their own exhaled breath.
The lithium hydroxide chemical to take carbon dioxide out of the air was not sufficient in the lunar module.
They would have to adapt the canisters from the command module to fit the hoses in the limb.
On the ground an adapter was fashioned from materials the crew had available in the limb.
Cardboard from a checklist, plastic bags and tape.
After checkout in an environmental chamber, the directions for construction were sent up to Aquarius.
At this point in time I think the partial pressure of carbon dioxide was reading about 15 millimeters.
And we constructed two of these things and put them on line and I think within an hour the partial pressure of CO2 was down to two tenths.
So you see that survival now became one of initiative and ingenuity and it was one which the ground continually helped us along.
We had all kinds of people on the ground trying to think of ways of extending our lifetime.
There would be still another burn. A mid-course correction to get Apollo 13 into the narrow corridor through the atmosphere for a safe return to work.
Where'd burn out of two flights? College?
Ignition.
The thrust looks good.
Shut down.
Hang in there, it won't be long.
There were moments when I didn't know how much consumables we had, whether we could make it back or not.
But yeah, in a situation like that there's only one thing you can do.
You just keep going and you just keep thinking up where you get more consumables.
And so that's exactly what we did.
On April 17th they prepared for reentry.
After a small course correction burn they jettison the damaged service module.
Copy that.
And there's one whole side of that big spare business.
Is that right?
It's on the whole panel that's blown out, almost probably a base of the engine.
Really a mess. Man, that's unbelievable.
Next they got back into Odyssey to jettison the quarriest prior to entry into the atmosphere.
Let's get it...
Okay, copy that.
So, well, Aquarius, thank you.
Okay, LOS in a minute or a minute and a half.
An entry attitude we'd like on me, Charlie.
And welcome home.
Thank you.
Odyssey Houston standing by over.
Here we go.
Odyssey Houston we show you how it's amazing.
Really looks great.
Oh, I'm not going to talk about Odyssey.
I'm going to talk about Odyssey Houston.
I'm going to talk about Odyssey Houston and the FOI.
Copy that.
We also heard one of Kelsey Christ,
I recall Captain that when I spoke to you on the phone, you said that you regretted
that you were unable to complete your mission. I hereby declare that this was a successful
mission. From the start, the exploration of space has been hazardous adventure. The
voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of Apollo 13 by their poise and skill
under the most intense kind of pressure epitomized the character that accepts danger and
surmoses. There is the spirit that filled America. Your missions served your country. It
served to remind us all of our proud heritage of a nation. To remind us that in this age
of technicians and scientific marvels that the individual still counts, that in a crisis,
the character of a man or a man will make the difference.
Go search it, go procedures, go AFD, go network, go computer suit, go.
God, network give me an hammer. RTC on FD conference. RTC on FD conference.
Okay, I'll flight in colors. Let's play it cool.
Let's go.
Thank you.